{{Redirect|Yang Wu|Yang Wu's "nail house" in Chongqing|Nail house#Examples}}
{{Infobox Former Country
|native_name            = 吳
|conventional_long_name = Wu
|common_name            = Wu (Ten Kingdoms)
|
|continent              = Asia
|region                 = China
|country                = China
|era                    = Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period
|status                 = Empire
|status_text            = 
|empire                 = Tang Dynasty
|government_type        = Monarchy
|
|
|year_start             = 907
|year_end               = 937
|
|year_exile_start       = 
|year_exile_end         = 
|
|event_start            = Fall of the [[Tang Dynasty]]
|date_start             = June 1, 907
|event_end              = Ended by the [[Southern Tang]]
|date_end               = [[937]]
|
|event1                 = [[Yang Longyan]] proclaimed himself King and inaugurated a new [[era name]]
|date_event1            = [[919]]
|event2                 = [[Yang Pu]] acceded the throne as Emperor
|date_event2            = November 29, 927
|event3                 = 
|date_event3            = 
|event4                 = 
|date_event4            = 
|
|event_pre              = Foundation of the State of Wu under [[Tang Dynasty|Tang]] rule
|date_pre               = [[902]]
|event_post             = 
|date_post              = 
|
|p1                     = Tang Dynasty
|s1                     = Southern Tang
|
|image_flag             = 
|flag                   = 
|flag_type              = 
|
|image_coat             = 
|symbol                 = 
|symbol_type            = 
|
|image_map              = 
|image_map_caption      = 
|
|capital                = [[Yangzhou|Guangling]]
|capital_exile          = 
|latd= |latm= |latNS= |longd= |longm= |longEW= 
|
|national_motto         = 
|national_anthem        = 
|common_languages       = [[Middle Chinese]]
|religion               = 
|currency               = 
|
|leader1                = [[Yang Wo]]
|leader2                = [[Yang Longyan]]
|leader3                = [[Yang Pu]] 
|leader4                = 
|year_leader1           = [[907]]-[[908]]
|year_leader2           = [[908]]-[[921]]
|year_leader3           = [[921]]-[[937]]
|year_leader4           = 
|title_leader           = [[Wu (Ten Kingdoms)#Rulers|Prince/King/Emperor]]
|deputy1                = 
|deputy2                = 
|deputy3                = 
|deputy4                = 
|year_deputy1           = 
|year_deputy2           = 
|year_deputy3           = 
|year_deputy4           = 
|title_deputy           = 
|
|stat_year1             = 
|stat_area1             = 
|stat_pop1              = 
|stat_year2             = 
|stat_area2             = 
|stat_pop2              = 
|stat_year3             = 
|stat_area3             = 
|stat_pop3              = 
|stat_year4             = 
|stat_area4             = 
|stat_pop4              = 
|stat_year5             = 
|stat_area5             = 
|stat_pop5              = 
|footnotes              = 
}}

'''Wu''' (吳), also referred to as '''Huainan''' (淮南), '''Hongnong''' (弘農), '''Southern Wu''' (南吳), or '''Yang Wu''' (楊吳), was one of the [[Ten Kingdoms]] in south-central [[China]] which was in existence between the years of 907 and 937.  Its capital was Jiangdu Municipality (江都).  It was replaced by [[Southern Tang]] in 937.

==Founding==

The founder of Wu, [[Yang Xingmi]], started his career as a volunteer soldier before seizing power in his home prefecture [[Hefei|Luzhou]] in a military coup. The weak [[Tang Dynasty|Tang]] court could only confirm his position. In 887 the governor of [[Huainan]], [[Gao Pian]], was captured by [[Bi Shiduo]]. Xingmi defeated Shiduo and captured the provincial capital [[Yangzhou]] later that year, but by then Pian had been put to death by Shiduo. Another rebel leader, [[Sun Ru]] had Shiduo killed and absorbed his forces. Yang Xingmi was forced to abandon Yangzhou and retreat to Luzhou. With Luzhou as his base, Xingmi increased his power by seizing neighbouring prefectures until he could recapture Yangzhou in 892. For this the Tang court granted him the military governorship of Huainan.

While still nominally loyal to the Tang dynasty, rival warlords were now carving out their own statelets. Yang Xingmi clashed with [[Taizu of Later Liang|Zhu Wen]] of [[Later Liang Dynasty|Liang]] in the north and [[Qian Liu]] of [[Wuyue]] in the south, successfully defending his territory. In 902 Yang Xingmi was named Prince of Wu by [[Emperor Zhaozong of Tang]].

==Independence==

Yang Xingmi died in 905 and was succeeded by his oldest son [[Yang Wo]]. In 907 Zhu Wen forced the last Tang emperor to abdicate and proclaimed himself the first emperor of the Later Liang dynasty. Yang Wo refused to acknowledge this change and continued the use of the last reign name of Tang. From this point Wu was an independent, sovereign entity.{{ref|mote}} 

==Subversion of power by Xu Wen==

Young and untested at his father's death Yang Wo had relied on the director of the guard, [[Xu Wen]], for his ascension, but later grew to resent Xu Wen's influence. However before he could pull himself free, Yang Wo was assassinated by Xu Wen and his colleague Zhang Hao in 908. Wen and Hao had initially planned to divide Wu between themselves and submit to Liang, but they soon fell out. Xu Wen installed Yang Wo's younger brother [[Yang Longyan|Longyan]] and had Zhang Hao killed. Yang Longyan was a mere puppet with Xu Wen as the state's true ruler. Wen made himself [[Runzhou]] governor and moved his command to [[Nanjing|Jinling]]. The regular administration at the capital was left to his son Xu Zhixun. After Zhixun's murder in 918 this position was inherited by Wen's stepson, [[Li Bian|Zhigao]]. In 919 Yang Longyan proclaimed himself King of Wu and inaugurated a new [[Chinese era name|era name]], thus for the first time Wu officially claimed to be a sovereign state. Longyan died of illness in 922 and was succeeded by his brother, Xingmi's fourth son, [[Yang Pu]]. As before, Xu Wen had the real power. He prodded Yang Pu to proclaim himself emperor, but died in 927 before this could happen. 29 November 927 Yang Pu acceded the throne as Emperor of Wu. Xu Zhigao was made grand marshal and director of the Chancellery.

==Territorial Extent==
Originally, the Wu Kingdom capital was at Guangling (present-day [[Yangzhou]]), and held present-day southern [[Anhui]], southern [[Jiangsu]], much of [[Jiangxi]], [[Hunan]], and eastern [[Hubei]]. The capital was later moved to Jinling (present-day [[Nanjing]]).{{ref|mote}}

==End of the Kingdom==
[[Li Bian|Xu Zhigao]] had been adopted by Xu Wen on Yang Xingmi's insistence and soon proved himself an able man. He came to power in Wu after his stepfather's death in 927 and continued to rule the state as governor of Jinling for some time. Finally in 937 he formally seized power for himself by proclaiming himself King of Qi and  Yang Pu abdicated. Two years later, claiming descent from a Tang prince Xu Zhigao restored his surname of Li, becoming Li Bian and proclaimed the restoration of the Tang. His state would be known to history as the [[Southern Tang]].{{ref|mote}}

==Rulers==	
* 904&ndash;905: [[Yang Xingmi|Yáng Xíngmì]] 楊行密 (Tài Zǔ Xiàowǔ Huángdì 太祖孝武皇帝)
* 905&ndash;908: [[Yáng Wò]] 楊渥 (Liè Zōng Jǐng Huángdì 烈宗景皇帝)
* 908&ndash;921: [[Yáng Lóngyǎn]] 楊隆演 (Gāo Zǔ Xuān Huángdì 高祖宣皇帝)
* 921&ndash;937: [[Yáng Pǔ]] 楊溥 (Ruì Huángdì 睿皇帝)

==See also==
* [[Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period]]

==References==
<references/>
*{{cite book|title=China's Southern Tang Dynasty (937-976)|author=Kurz, Johannes L.|publisher=Routledge|year=2011|id=ISBN-9780415454964}}

{{note|Mote}}  {{cite book|title=Imperial China 900-1800|author=Mote, FW.|publisher=Harvard University Press|year=1999|page=14}}

{{cite book |author=Ouyang Xiu |authorlink= Ouyang Xiu |others= trans. by Richard L. Davis |title =Historical records of the five dynasties |year= 2004 |publisher= Columbia University Press |location= New York |isbn= 0-231-12826-6}}

==External links==
* http://www.chinaknowledge.de/History/Tang/rulers-wu.html

{{5d10k}}

[[Category:States and territories established in 907]]
[[Category:Wu (Ten Kingdoms)|*]]
[[Category:937 disestablishments]]

[[de:Wu (Zehn Königreiche)]]
[[ko:오 (십국)]]
[[ja:呉 (十国)]]
[[no:Wu (De ti kongedømmer)]]
[[vi:Ngô (Thập quốc)]]
[[zh:杨吴]]
